\chapter{Abstract}
\label{chap:abstract}

Drasil is a software suite for generating software, with a particular focus on
generating \ACF{scs} following the requirements described in an abstract
\ACF{srs} template. The template breaks up scientific knowledge into various
categories, and the abstracted variant of the template makes it digestible for
Drasil. A series of \acsp{dsl} are used to ``fill in'' the template, from which
Drasil is able to interpret an instance of, and configure a generation procedure
to generate software. The depth of knowledge contained in the template's
theories is key to understanding to what end we can interpret and use the
instantiated theories. To begin strengthening this depth, we create a structure
that concretely outlines Drasil's currently encoded theory kinds, allowing us to
create more domain-specific interpretation opportunities for them. Similarly,
each theory kind contains a particular subset of mathematical language that is
relevant to them, and we act on this information to restrict usable expression
terms to their related contexts. To further enrich the admissibility of
expressions, we also make one of the most critical subsets, that for concrete
theory transcription, type-safe by building a bidirectional type-checker. The
type-checker shows considerable success, highlighting expressions violating a
defined set of type rules. Finally, as Drasil relies on a plethora of different
types of knowledge, it needs a place to store them. Thus, we create a system to
store any instance of any type of knowledge in Drasil's memory bank of
knowledge, and enforce a basic set of requirements that each type of knowledge
must satisfy.
