# Problem/Purpose Statement & Questions

A [guided
technique](https://cecilebadenhorst.wordpress.com/carnegie-african-diaspora-workshops/problempurpose-statements-ppsqs/)
to assist in writing graduate theses by Dr. Cecile Badenhorst.

## Problem Statement

Flexibly generating a wide range of software artifacts from a single purely
mathematical expression language is difficult. Specifically, from an "untyped"
universal mathematical expression language.

Using a single mathematical language to describe all computational models in
ways that we can generate a plethora of software artifacts, is difficult.

## Knowledge Gap

In the land of codified/standardized science problems where representational
computational models exist, there is no coherent language used to tie them
together into a concise language that any scientist may use to describe a whole
computational system where software is built as a side effect of their precise
description of the computational system.

## Context

As more scientific software is built, the pool of knowledge grows and more
becomes understood, but the knowledge gets "wasted"/lost in being specific to
that program. Drasil is a project that that aims to capture the knowledge of all
programs, specifically scientific software at the moment, to preserve the wasted
knowledge and create a generator of families of software artifacts by using a
series of coherent domain-specific languages to describe problems where some
computation is a part of its solution.

## Logic & Documentation

Considering the inefficiency of modern unshared/hidden/proprietary software
development, knowledge is needed to understand how we can build the same
software faster, more reliably, satisfying clearly stated requirements, and with
less effort/mental strain.

_Continuation of this section is pending a bit more reading._

## Purpose Statement

The purpose of this research is to better understand how mathematical language
relates to software artifacts. In practice, this research will investigate this
in the context of Drasil, where a mathematical language is used to generate
families of software programs. Along the way, we will strive to answer the
following questions:

## Questions

1. What kind of software/computational models are we interested in
   describing/systematically building/generating?
2. What are the mathematical components we need to describe theories?
3. How do the mathematical ideas relate to their representational computational
   software? Specifically, how can we convert mathematical ideas into usable
   code?
